M.S., like Kumar and other discussed Ambedkar’s ideas in the context of political and social thought. But this recent biography lacks the personal touch of Ambedkar which is available in the biography written by Dhananjay Keer as he wrote on Ambedkar when the later was alive. Another discontent of this book is the author’s tendency to compare Indian thought and the western philosophies. In this book the author has presented Ambedkar’s political thought and compared it with that of Gandhi. Nehru’s vision of social-democracy, Ambedkar’s vison of liberal-democracy, Gandhi’s vision of non-modernist, village centric, egalitarian vision of Prof. Considering the account of Eleanor Zelliot, Rosalind O’Hanlon and Gail Omvedt, the book also focuses on the writings of Phule and his Satyashodhak Samaj and examines how these writings have shaped the Marathi non-Brahmin and Dalit political thought. She articulates that in the theoretical debates religious minorities have not got any central position due to the politics of communalism. Connection between the issues of the Untouchables and the African-American can also be found in the work of Jyotiba Phule who dedicated his book, Gulamgiri, to the Blacks of America. This shows that the hatred is not for religion but of the ethnic stock of Muslims and Christians and at the same time oppose religious pluralism. Only then can something be concluded. For Ambedkar as an individual and for his community as a whole, the British administration proved a much better alternative than the existing Brahminical social structure. The book argues that this helped him to design an egalitarian society in which he envisaged equal social space for everyone irrespective of gender, religion, caste and class. It also processes the theorization of violence and relates the same with the Dalit identity and their manifestations with social hierarchy. According to the book, the determinisations were based on his hard work, self-sacrifices, social humiliation and exploitation. Rajeev Bhargava, thus, argues that when the Constituent Assembly was drafting the Indian Constitution, there evolved a tradition of ‘Indian political philosophy’ which was a product of sincere contribution of the members of the Constituent Assembly who belonged to different and at times rivalry camps of ideological thoughts. The book further explores Ambedkar’s contribution towards a new model of liberation. Both of them took up the issue of caste, though differently. The author argues that the according to Right-wing parties in India, religious minorities like Muslims and Christians are not loyal to India because they are outsiders and are not familiar with Indian culture. By spoken discourse it means that she has analysed the understanding of positioning the female issue by interaction with the respondents through conversing manner. It has also tried to transform the Dalit identity from a negative sense to a positive worth. It is an attempt to focus on collective rights and amelioration rather than individual power and liberation. Romila Thapar’s lecture speaks that while writing the Indian history, the voice of the dissent was missing due to the influence or rather force from the upper caste Hindus. In this model he talks about the raising of exploited and harassed people to the level of a new era of equalitarian world. Quoting Upendra Baxi, who once said that Ambedkar remains a totally forgotten figure, Jaffrelot argues that Ambedkar was ignored by the fraternity of scholars. The book claims to present Ambedkar without fabricating his nature and attitude. In order to understand this aspect comprehensively, I considered the work of Zoya Hasan. Her work, “Ambedkar – Towards an Enlightened India” discusses Ambedkar in the same light that Jadhav did. In the process of writing this work, the author heavily relied on the literature written in English by both the thinkers while ignoring the Marathi and Gujarati writings that they composed. Thus, it becomes imperative to study the history of Indian democratic process with the history of caste and anti-caste movements. In this process, the book creates a platform where Gandhi’s “Hind Swaraj” and Ambedkar’s “Annihilation of Caste” could be analysed in the context of both the author’s ideologies. Asghar Ali Engineer in his “Muslims and India” discusses issues related to the role of religious minorities in India’s society and polity. The confrontations between the two on these issues are lucidly explained in this book. This would help to understand the link between the structure of Indian society and the deliberation of the founding fathers behind this. Like Narendra Jadhav who presented Ambedkar not only as the leader of untouchables but as a national leader in his book, Ambedkar: Awakening India’s Social Conscience, this book explores the same domain too. His book “The Social Context of an Ideology-Ambedkar’s Political and Social Thought”, however, discusses what no other scholar does – the role of ‘ideology’ in the context of protest. This isn’t to say that one work is better than the other; both of them have intrinsic values. All the authors have critically evaluated every word of Ambedkar in order to analyze him deeply and with full dedication as if there is still something left which is not covered and needs to be unveiled so that more can be done for humanity at large. The argument presented by the author is similar to what Zoya Hasan has talked about in her book Politics of Inclusion: Caste, Minorities and Affirmative Action. At later stage he even converted to Buddhism in order to provide the untouchables a life of respect and dignity. He added that there is no match of Ambedkar in terms of his scholarship in the field of politics, philosophy, society etc. It is assumed as a fear and as a resentment that Ambedkar still stimulates within Indian polity. This biography discusses Ambedkar’s perspective on multiple issues and his ideological clash with his contemporaries. Adding to this she says that the issue of inclusion can be materialized in more sophisticated manner if the decision-making process will include representatives from the disadvantaged communities. Doing this the author also brings the question of Dalit into the articulation of global history of political thought. Babasaheb Ambedkar-Life and Mission” two years prior to Ambedkar’s death. Arun Mukherjee in his “B.R. Ambedkar, John Dewey, and the Meaning of Democracy” writes how Ambedkar’s contribution to sociology has been systematically ignored. and to justify his arguments he has taken the back of the foreign philosophers and at times has attached the arguments written by them with Ambedkar and Gandhi and proves them as the writings of both the leaders. This also includes their demand for rights and other constitutional laws. This book is a work of Dalit history of Maharashtra from 1880s to 1990s and examines the role of events, moments and actions of individuals in the formation of history. The third reason was the exclusion of Ambedkar from the mainstream discourse because of his connection with the British as he at times was also considered as the stooge of the former. The book also exhibits the varying ideological approaches which the contributors have devoted to examine Ambedkar. The book further argues that in the history of India the evolvement of its political theory is the result of the political thoughts of the founding fathers who gave a concrete shape to the Indian constitution and was probably the only occasion when the contributors came across through this forum for extensive political deliberation and at the same time arguing over procedural and extensive issues .The author argues that a political theoretical perspective on Indian Constitution is missing and he based this argument on certain assumptions. It is presented in a chronological form and discusses Ambedkar from his childhood to his death and events and occasions through which he passed and receives a new identity. Omvedt, with her husband, Bharat Patankar leads the Shramik Mukti Dal and has an experience of engaging with Marxism and Ambedkarism on ground with the working-class, most of whom are Dalits. The primary focus of this book is to investigate the politics of inclusion by examining the policies and debate with what the state considers in matters to the position of disadvantaged groups, both caste and religious minorities, and the execution of affirmative action. The merit of this work resides in the fact that is was composed when Ambedkar was alive, thus, the work doesn’t look Ambedkar as a figure in contemporary history, but looks at him as a contemporary politician and thinker. Gopal Guru’s estimation of Ambedkar is the position given to the latter in the field of politics. It is further argued that in a democratic set up it becomes difficult to deprive the political rights of minorities, therefore new strategies have been adopted in which removing of minority status is focused. For more coherence understanding, the author has taken the help of spoken discourse rather than written. He argues that Ambedkar’s birth as a political leader took place during the electoral process, at the formation of his political parties and the writings which Ambedkar contributed immeasurably throughout his academic, social and political life. In her analysis, the examination caste system in South Asia has some major limitations. According to her, the conventional understanding of the Secular, Historic understanding of Caste done by Sociologists is limited. Ambedkar’s main argument against caste was that this form of “graded inequality” excluded a large chunk of people from political, social and educational life. Arguing on the same theme, Moggallan Bharti writes that each lecture delivered during this whole decade talks of Ambedkar in Dalit-Bahujan socio-political domain. This further leads to the theoretical and conceptual understanding of the concept of caste in the discourse of social sciences. At this moment I will return to Prof. In order to understand Caste sociologically and add value to the discourse, I considered Debjani Ganguly’s “Caste, Colonialism and Counter- Modernity: Notes on a Post-Colonial Hermeneutics of Caste. The same expression is found in M. S. Gore’s book, “The Social Context of an Ideology-Ambedkar’s Political and Social Thought”, when he talks of the significance of the social background behind the origin of any movement or protest. While it is extremely important to study Ambedkar as an idealogue, it is equally important to understand the ideological context in which Ambedkar functioned. These movements are initiated for bringing changes for betterment of every individual. Ambedkar and Untouchability: Analyzing and Fighting Caste” looks at a Pragmatic and Idealist thinker. Along with this Phule can be observed articulating gender emancipation and the author argues that this mitigation has limited sphere on the ground that the patriarchal setup was imbibed by the caste system so deeply that there is an urgent need to rectify it in form of gender reform. At the same time, it also examines the challenges faced by women and their efforts to counter them. To articulate this the author has tried to understand Ambedkar by situating him in the context of Maharashtra and its social movements. This book is a short biography of Ambedkar. Rao has called this transformation as vernacularisation of political universals. She further examines that the study of marginalized groups is done in isolation from each other and this becomes the major hinderance in the formulation of inclusive research and discourses. “Politics and Ethics of the Indian Constitution” is a collection of essays written by eminent political scientists on the themes that are pertinent to understand this political philosophic tradition that shaped the Indian Constitution. The text argues that any event, action, person or idea has a particular background and to understand them, the study of the background becomes essential. While evaluating critically the contributions of various authors in this book, Rodrigues also examines him and his legacy as an entry level of study for anyone to read and understand Ambedkar. The book also argues that Ambedkar formulated a fundamental law that created the difference between the freedom of the nation and the freedom of its people. Moreover, the book tries to fit the Dalits into the framework of modern concepts of nation state like democracy, secularism, citizenship and rights. Firstly, he says that the conceptual structure of the constitution is elaborated insufficiently in the most available existing works. Ambedkar was not considered as a true Social Scientist because his strategies were for the destruction of a social system that oppressed a large number of people. The book contains legal case studies of Dalit and analyses the violence that becomes the base of these studies. Thus, this book contextualises Ambedkar’s movement. The book articulates the linkages of the Dalit community with the concepts like their miserable history, their way of life and their backwardness in absence of education and rational thinking. She adds that in order to understand the politics of inclusion it is imperative to examine by which level of magnitude the aspirations of the disadvantaged groups are heard by the political elites. He further examines Ambedkar’s opposition to Gandhi on the core issue of caste and calls its impact on untouchable’s life as living death that sounds similar to Gopal Guru’s walking carcass which he used to describe the wrecked condition of untouchables. This assumption lacks the fact that Ambedkar’s contribution in the freedom movement was different and unique. In the course of ‘contextualisation’, the author explores the nature of Ambedkar’s ideas and how they interreacted with the societal system. According to the author, considering Ambedkar only the leader of the untouchables will be injustice to his legacy. It is further examined how Dalits were mobilized during the colonial rule and how they waged their movements for their realization of individuals of equal dignity and respect. This work explains the interconnection of exploitation, human dignity and equality in any given social order. Anupama Rao’s “The Caste Question: Dalits and the Politics of Modern India” is a work of Sociology and Anthropology. He collaborated with the British and later with the Congress for the betterment of the untouchables. Hasan further adds that during the drafting of the constitution, preferential treatment was given to the lower castes whereas cultural rights were granted to religious minorities and this became the main hurdle in their development in terms of livelihood and access to resources. He rather talks of exemplar in Ambedkar which is very vital for mobilization of Dalits in the protest movements and also for those who neglected him in their scholarly work. The book enunciates how Ambedkar’s understanding of the struggle for emancipation evolved through his theoretical assumptions. The book has successfully articulated Ambedkar’s and Gandhi’s understanding the colonial period and its related socio-political issues and the ways they both had adopted to provide a solution of a relative degree. His book, “Dr. He further says that it was because of his instinct towards the educational culture that produced him a scholar and the same scholarly methods he applied for the liberation of his people from the bondages of caste Hindus. One of the contributors of this book, Bhikhu Parekh, argues that to understand Ambedkar’s philosophy in an exact way, it is important to analyze him on the basis of his time period. Secondly, he asserts that the same existing works also inadequately grasp the structure of ideals incorporated in the Indian Constitution. There is an attempt to interlink the history and anthropology to produce Dalit perspective from modern Indian political discourse. This will also provide the value structure attached to each of the provisions of the Indian Constitution. She says that constitutional provisions have also focused on the issues of SCs, STs and OBCs on the ground of their being disadvantaged on the basis of caste. Valerian Rodriguez, this time with his edited work, “Conversations with Ambedkar: 10 Ambedkar Memorial Lectures”, an anthology of 10 lectures on Ambedkar organized by Ambedkar University, Delhi and delivered by eminent scholars on the life and philosophy of Ambedkar. It is noteworthy that Ambedkar wasn’t just a political activist or a philosopher, he was also a Sociologist. He further analyzed the thought process of Ambedkar, what is caste system and how to annihilate it. He attempted to analyse the intrinsic values available in writings of both Ambedkar and Gandhi. Secondly, the book talks about the unique characteristics of movements and how important they are to the study of the nature of a societal system. K.T. Shah and lastly the vision of Hindutava ideology has dominated the structure of Indian Constitution. On the other hand, Upendra Baxi has taken the account of the writings of both Gandhi and Ambedkar and coined a new phrase for their methods as ‘insurgent reason’. A discourse that was accentuated by Ambedkar ever since the 1920, Hasan takes it forward and articulates the claim more comprehensively. Rodrigues has introduced this book and presented Ambedkar as a highly developed person full of academic strength. Apart from this, the book covers variety of themes related to Ambedkar’s thoughts, his actions and his influence on the socio-political discourse of Indian society. The book also shows how Ambedkar’s approach evolved through the years, from seeking assimilation in the wider Hindu social order to take refuge in politics. The second reason was the position of Ambedkar in Indian society as a leader of voiceless. While Jadhav’s work could be considered interpretative, Keers work was based on authorised claims by Ambedkar himself. In this framework of social behaviour, the book explores the idea of protests and movements and explains that there is always existed some background for their explosion; the work examines the origin of social movements in a given society. Each system is distinct from the other and thus the nature of the movement is different too. As per her observation, Ambedkar discussed the emancipation of women, however, didn’t discuss it in the context of their political participation. Both these thinkers were educated abroad, and their experience in mass mobilisation portrayed them as mass leaders. Instead of these lacunas the author has tried to bring both the leaders on common platform and shows that they both had faith in liberal democracy and had encountered with the similar social issue of untouchability and at the same time both tried to determine their interpretations of liberal democracy in its resolution. Ambedkar started movements for the emancipation of the untouchables as protest movements in order to change the social behaviour. Through this, the author also investigates the same expression in the background of European and anti-colonial contour. This becomes the base of his protests and movements through which he demanded a social space for disadvantaged people with full respect and dignity. First, Ambedkar was considered only as a leader of the Untouchables and not as a leader who participated in the freedom movement Most of the writers that I have discussed in this review agree with this claim. Apart from this, the book argues that caste is produced by certain fundamental forms that remain forever. The third and last point the author says that in order to comprehend the theoretical perspective and its justification, the Constituent Assembly debates must be referred. In other words, the book projected Ambedkar as he was. It examines how the mark of disgrace attached to the untouchable community is reviewed as an identity in which the untouchables are looked as a victim community of exploitation and harassment and then with the support of movements and resistance how they became politically powerful. She further argues that in order to deduce the meaning and idea of caste it should be looked not as a substance of backwardness of countries of South Asia but as the organized structure of practices and customs instructed and followed as a flow and the same cannot be articulated in the discourse of nation-building, modernization and development. The book also presents the ideology of Ambedkar in terms of social movements which is different from the older movements led by social reformers prior to him. Christophe Jafferlot, like Sharmila Rege argues how Ambedkar was systematically ignored until the 1970s by scholars and the mainstream political discourse. Here, he theorised n ideological framework in which Ambedkar’s attempt to emancipate the Dalits was analysed. Far from this angle, the author has tried to examine the strategy-oriented approach and the same he experimented in case of Ambedkar.
