Ambedkar is one of those thinkers in India who has attracted scholars from both India and abroad. What makes Ambedkar an attractive figure is his ideas of emancipation and his political action. Although these two variables can be seen in almost every work composed on Ambedkar, there are multiple variables that we must consider while creating a structure to understand the literature on Ambedkar.
Before I begin, it is imperative to categorise the literature on Ambedkar. These categories aren’t rigid, however, will help create a methodical approach to my thesis. As per my reading of secondary material, some scholars have looked at Ambedkar as a Political Philosopher/Theorist; some looked at him as an ‘Activist’; and others look at him as a ‘Statesman’. The category in which the literature has been divided are three: One deals with Ambedkar as an ‘Intellectual Thinker’; the second deals with The context in which Ambedkar functioned; and the third category deals with theoretical and philosophical frameworks that I employed in the study of this thesis. Sharmila Rege in her book “Against the Madness of Manu – B.R. Ambedkar’s Writings on Brahmanical Patriarchy”. In this work, Rege pin points those specific writings of Ambedkar that portrays a feminist in him. While considering any secondary study on Ambedkar, it is vital to associate it with one of Ambedkar’s primary writings. In “Castes in India”, Ambedkar writes how the Brahmanical ideology considers women as mere “surplus” and how the Brahmanical laws control the sexuality of women.
Rege argued that post-independence, Ambedkar couldn’t be entitled to the stature at Gandhi, Nehru and Lohia did, and this trend continued until 1970. It was the struggle of the Dalit writers that today, Ambedkar is in the mainstream academic discourse. Rege is one of those rare scholars who puts Ambedkar at the centre of feminist theory, a trend that still is alien to academics in India. Feminist thinkers like Emma Goldman, and Alexandra Kollontai are romanticised in the feminist academic circles, but there’s hardly any reference of Ambedkar as a key feminist thinker. Rege clubbed Ambedkar’s ideas as ‘feminist ideas’ as two variables – personal and political. As per her observation, Ambedkar discussed the emancipation of women, however, didn’t discuss it in the context of their political participation. Here, Ambedkar is allegedly less feminist and less modern, however, his concern for ‘Universal Adult Franchise’ proves how the aforementioned claim can be countered. 
This brings us to Aishwary Kumar’s understanding of Ambedkar’s ideas. In an interview with The Caravan on his recent book “Radical Equality”, Kumar writes says that ‘Ambedkar was a revolutionary, because he was inherently a constitutionalist’. Here, he emphasised on his idea of “force”, not power, but force. Kumar connects Ambedkar’s ideas to that of Hannah Arndt, for he believes that a ‘revolutionary tradition is unimaginable without a constitutionalist tradition’. Thus, Rege and Kumar have to be clubbed in one category, for both of them looked at Ambedkar not only as a theorist and philosopher respectively, but as a liberator, a revolutionary. 
The most feminist moment of Ambedkar as a parliamentarian was observed when he pressed for the passing of the Hindu Code Bill. Chitra Sinha in her work “Debating Patriarchy: The Hindu Code Bill Controversy in India (1941-1956). While the author explains the evolution of the discourse surrounding the Bill, it is important to look at Ambedkar in this context. One of the most important books (anthology in this case) on Ambedkar that looks at him as a theorist is “The Radical in Ambedkar: Critical Reflections”. The anthology edited by Anand Teltumbde and Suraj Yengde consists of multiple papers discussing diverse issues associated with Ambedkar which includes the relevance of his ideas on conversion, or looking at his seminal work “Annihilation of Caste” through a Marxist, Gramscian and Weberian lens. The editors didn’t romanticise Ambedkar as merely as the emancipator of Dalits or the composer of Indian Constitution but also as an educated individual; an economist, as a skilled journalist, a trade unionist, a prolific writer, a feminist, a constitutionalist, a scholar who reviewed and reconstructed Buddhism. The anthology suggests how ironically, Ambedkar is considered divine. 
According to the editors, Ambedkar was against Communism (please verify). His inclination towards Buddhism indicates his ‘Pragmatic’ attitude; this was the prime motivation for converting to Buddhism. Buddhism turned out to be the religion that adhered to the values of ‘liberty’, ‘equality’, and ‘fraternity’, which Ambedkar believed the Dalits were deprived of. The editors argued that in post-independence India, the role of Gandhian idea of Ram Rajya and village communities couldn’t get in tune with the structure of neoliberal policies of the government. In this context, Ambedkar filled the vacuum of a ‘Modern Thinker’ that India needed. 
Thus, he appropriated heavily and was used for political gain. the editors have attempted to place Ambedkar at the international level with those people who faced similar humiliation and suppression in one way or the other at the hands of their oppressors. Ambedkar’s struggle for Dalit liberation has been associated with that of the struggles of the African-Americans in the US. This projection of Ambedkar was an attempt to internationalise the nature of this struggle. Unlike Gandhi who took active part in South Africa against apartheid, Ambedkar did not take any interest in the liberation of Blacks in America. Eleanor Zelliot points that Ambedkar doesn’t compare the situations faced by Blacks of America and untouchables in his any of his writings. This analysis suggests that Ambedkar wasn’t willing to fight the cause of Blacks in America, and focused only on completing his studies. For him, the magnitude of exploitation against untouchables was much more severe than the Blacks. Ambedkar knew that slavery of Blacks (please verify) could be eradicated but the dogma of untouchability can never see the light of the day. He added, ‘once an untouchable, always an untouchable.’. His methods and strategies are often compared with that of the Black leader, WEB Du Bois who believed in a radical change through education and access to political power. Connection between the issues of the Untouchables and the African-American can also be found in the work of Jyotiba Phule who dedicated his book, Gulamgiri, to the Blacks of America. Ambedkar’s link with the Black movement can also be seen through Phule whom Ambedkar considered one of his gurus. Ambedkar, however, doesn’t mention the relationship between the struggles of the two communities anywhere in any of his writings. There was only once instance when Ambedkar and WEB Du Bois exchanged letters in 1946 when the former sought the latter’s help in representing the cause of untouchables at United Nations. The book also reveals that three ‘isms’ played significant role in the life of Ambedkar and shaped his personality at different intervals. These three ‘isms’ were ‘Pragmatism’, ‘Fabianism’ and ‘Buddhism’. Throughout his life he looked at social issues through a Pragmatic lens; for political propensity he behaved like a Fabian, and for spiritual causes, Ambedkar took refuge to Buddhism. But at the same time, he also maintained the balance between the three and never made himself dependent on any one of them. In this endeavour Ambedkar is projected in relation with Weber who also claims his opposition to class struggle as the only element of exploitation. He is portrayed as the messiah of the downtrodden, the workers, the landless labourers and who didn’t work in the class interest of the capitalists like most of the leaders.
His idea of a ‘nation’ included the aspirations of the marginalized excluded community. The nation Ambedkar was living in was a nation where the Untouchables have been systematically ignored from the community, mode of production and political process. This book bridges the gap between the two images of Ambedkar, the image of a ‘theorist’ and an ‘activist’. The focus on Ambedkar’s context and the issues pertaining to the cause of Dalits and untouchables in India has been simultaneously been discussed and compared with the issues of several marginalised communities living in different parts of the world. The book also touches the issues of the political rights of the minority and presents Ambedkar as the leader who championed these problems through the legal framework. Thus, in his understanding the minority is not defined on the fixed parameters of geographical space rather the same needs to be looked from the angle of subjugation and oppression. In nutshell it can be said that the writers have tried to glorify Ambedkar as an international figure and the strategies Ambedkar adopted have similarities with many other leaders and philosophers of special status.


The category of scholars that I will discuss now are different from Aishwary Kumar and others who look at Ambedkar as a theorist. This camp of scholars studies Ambedkar as a personality and his impact of the Dalit movement. Ambedkar wasn’t just a highly educated thinker, he was a political activist, his works and his ideas resonated with his politics, which I will explain further. Eleanor Zelliot’s “Ambedkar’s World: The Making of Babasaheb and the Dalit movement” wrote Ambedkar’s exposure to modern, western education helped him understand the ills of traditional values that he was bound to on the land he was born into. In this book the author has tried to project Ambedkar as a person who is more powerful in his ideology in recent milieu than his lifetime. This book argues how Ambedkar’s personal experiences and his education changed him as an intellectual who eventually dedicated all his life for the emancipation of the Dalits. This book to a large extent helps in answering my first research question with regards to the political and historical context that an individual dwell into. 
Eleanor Zelliot through her writings has analyzed the significance of ‘movement’ in social life. In this book she explains the emergence of Ambedkar through a social movement that at later became a political movement and provided a common but unique method to untouchables to assert their wrath. It is noteworthy that Ambedkar himself was never the champion of any electoral game, however, his social movement constructed a pedestal on which the Dalit-Bahujan politics now asserts itself. In her writings, she has categorized these movements under the headings called “Modern Awakening”. These movements, she said, were basically the Mahar movements in which the Mahar community had played a pivotal. Through this book the author attempted to write the Mahar history with the help of its own written sources and the same she argued, became a part of history of Maharashtra including its high classes and bureaucratic structure along with the elements of nationalism. Under this scheme, Eleanor’s attempt comes out from a different angle wherein she brings out the role of movement waged by the Mahar community, unorganized at initial stage but formal and organized at later stage, under the guidance of Ambedkar. Looking at the same development from the other side, emergence of Ambedkar, based on the popularity of movements also accomplished. The author further added that it was the impact of the modern western education that empowered Ambedkar to reject the traditional menial task which his community was assigned to perform and at the same time he initiated movements or political changes to bring a total revolution in the Hindu social structure. As a Mahar, he experienced the events happened in his as well as in the life of other Mahar caste people and compared the same with the life of the upper caste people. Ambedkar was fortunate enough to gain English education outside the village life of Maharashtra in his early life and therefore at this stage he could not develop that rage, the same which helped in Ambedkar’s emergence as a leader of Mahars and other untouchable communities. This time coincided with the time when began reading the works of Jotiba Phule who infused in the non-Brahmins to raise their voice for their solutions. Apart from this, Ambedkar was also influenced by the colonial rule in India. For Ambedkar as an individual and for his community as a whole, the British administration proved a much better alternative than the existing Brahminical social structure. This included the political reforms and representation of the untouchables in the government. Ambedkar’ social movement became an important variable to reconstruct the society in a democratic manner. Democracy wasn’t here just a political reform, but a social reform first. The book further explores the different roles played by Ambedkar in the social and political arena. His presence in all the movements and his influence on the Untouchables made him a prominent figure. ‘Untouchability’ would not have been portrayed as a curse on mankind so vehemently had it not been for Ambedkar and his revolution. His call for the ‘reconstruction of the society’, one could taste the Deweyan essence. Thus, referring to John Dewey’s Democracy and Education” to study the ideas of Ambedkar is vital. The book also talks about the later developments that shaped Ambedkar from a Mahar leader to the leader of the millions of Untouchables. Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, Justice and Democracy were virtues that Ambedkar wanted to make sure, the Dalits are not deprived of. These so-called ‘Western values’, according to him weren’t in any of the western religion, per say, but a religion of India – Buddhism. Thus, conversion to Buddhism was the answer to escaping the oppression of Brahmanism. This move made him the real emancipator of the masses. The author critically examined the role of political parties that Ambedkar started in his lifetime. In the concluding remarks the author clarifies that the book is not the work of political biography of Ambedkar rather attempts have been made to project this literary work as the journey of Mahar caste from which Ambedkar emerged as their leader who not only spoke for their amelioration but also for their political and social rights. When Aishwary Kumar discusses the idea of ‘force’ in Ambedkar’s thought, he precisely talks of the aspect of conversion and how in the “Annihilation of Caste”, he urges the Hindus to “destroy the religion of Srutis and Smritis”.  

Narendra Jadhav in his “Ambedkar: Awakening India’s Social Conscience” presented Ambedkar as a conscious socio-political man from 1920s until his death in 1956.  The book explores him as a personality who neither inherited any fortune from his family nor received due position on the basis of his education and work but was so focused and determined that he was invited to draft the constitution of the free India for its smooth administration. According to the book, the determinisations were based on his hard work, self-sacrifices, social humiliation and exploitation. The book argues that this helped him to design an egalitarian society in which he envisaged equal social space for everyone irrespective of gender, religion, caste and class. Ambedkar, through his ideas laid the foundation of modern India.
 According to the author, considering Ambedkar only the leader of the untouchables will be injustice to his legacy. He was a national leader in the sense that his way of nationalism was different from that of the ways of the Congress leaders for whom freedom for the disadvantaged was never a matter of concern. No doubt he also demanded freedom for the nation but mere independence from the colonial rule was not his motive. In his scheme of freedom, he contemplated two ‘freedoms’. One from the British and second for the Untouchables from the Caste Hindus. Through these two freedoms he envisioned to establish a new India where there would be no place for caste discrimination, social inequality, arbitrary rule of one community over the other. Ambedkar was a polymath – an Economist, a political thinker, an educationist, administrator, jurist, a Parliamentarian, a Sociologist, an Anthropologist and the principal architect of the Indian Constitution. He was a prolific writer, with writings stretching across almost 21 volumes and are a culmination of speeches, articles in his magazines and journals that he started to fight the cause of his community people, monographs and research papers. All these writings were brought into existence while he was struggling for the emancipation of his people, at the time of drafting the constitution and debating and discussing issues in the Parliament. The books also categorizes Ambedkar’s speeches which he delivered inside the Constituent Assembly, in Parliament and at various occasions and public gatherings on the themes like politics, elections, freedom struggle, religion, gender disparity and social causes. The book claims to be a more comprehensive biography of Ambedkar and simultaneously more informative as compared to Dhananjay Keer, C. B. Khairmode and B. C. Kamble’s work on the ground of them not being associated with the volumes of Ambedkar’s Writings and Speeches brought by the Government of Maharashtra. The book claims to contain the intellectual attribute of Ambedkar, evolution of his ideas and the methods Ambedkar adopted to tackle the socio-political circumstances of his times. It is presented in a chronological form and discusses Ambedkar from his childhood to his death and events and occasions through which he passed and receives a new identity. But this recent biography lacks the personal touch of Ambedkar which is available in the biography written by Dhananjay Keer as he wrote on Ambedkar when the later was alive. Keer was Ambedkar’s biographer composed one of the most important sources for any scholar working on Ambedkar – “Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar-Life and Mission” two years prior to Ambedkar’s death. 
This book is the first English biography of Ambedkar. Keer was in touch with Ambedkar personally when he wrote this biography, which makes biography authorised. The book claims to present Ambedkar without fabricating his nature and attitude. In other words, the book projected Ambedkar as he was. It argues that Ambedkar devoted himself completely to emancipation of the Untouchables and their liberation movements. He played a decisive role in articulating what life the untouchables have as a true human being. Therefore, there is a need to understand him not by how other authors have presented him after destroying his real image rather he must be understood as he was. This biography discusses Ambedkar’s perspective on multiple issues and his ideological clash with his contemporaries. This work explains the interconnection of exploitation, human dignity and equality in any given social order. This work is loyal to the chronological order of the events that happened in Ambedkar’s life and takes the reader from Ambedkar’s journey from a Dalit boy, to a scholar and a Statesman. The merit of this work resides in the fact that is was composed when Ambedkar was alive, thus, the work doesn’t look Ambedkar as a figure in contemporary history, but looks at him as a contemporary politician and thinker. Keer received a rare opportunity of documenting Ambedkar’s ideas in multiple interviews. While Jadhav’s work could be considered interpretative, Keers work was based on authorised claims by Ambedkar himself. This isn’t to say that one work is better than the other; both of them have intrinsic values. 
An author who can be clubbed into the category of writers who look at Ambedkar as a political activist and a revolutionary like Jadhav, is Gail Omvedt. Omvedt, with her husband, Bharat Patankar leads the Shramik Mukti Dal and has an experience of engaging with Marxism and Ambedkarism on ground with the working-class, most of whom are Dalits. Her work, “Ambedkar – Towards an Enlightened India” discusses Ambedkar in the same light that Jadhav did. This book is a short biography of Ambedkar. Like Narendra Jadhav who presented Ambedkar not only as the leader of untouchables but as a national leader in his book, Ambedkar: Awakening India’s Social Conscience, this book explores the same domain too. It presents Ambedkar as a leader of national capacity whose way of struggling during the freedom movement was different and unique. This unique way of nationalism can be observed in his writings and speeches, the work he did for the emancipation of the Dalits, through the aims and objectives of the political parties he formed to articulate his strategies, his debates and discussions during the sessions of the Constituent Assembly and in Parliament. Ambedkar was a highly educated person and knew the importance of education in life in general and in lives of untouchables in particular. Therefore, he emphasised on education and established educational institutions to fight against the Brahminical structure. This argument is lucidly expressed in this book and supports Ambedkar’s argument of India becoming enlightened through education only. 
According to this book, all the events – political, social, educational, protests, writing books and delivering speeches, portray the story of Ambedkar’s nationalism and simultaneously his scheme of nation building, his vision of an egalitarian society, free from all sorts of disparities. The book further explores Ambedkar’s contribution towards a new model of liberation. In this model he talks about the raising of exploited and harassed people to the level of a new era of equalitarian world. The book critically looks at the between Ambedkar – Gandhi debate by taking note of various speeches and writings both delivered and written at different occasions to defend their position and articulations. Both the thinkers claimed to be the true representators of the Untouchables. For Ambedkar they were “Untouchables” and for Gandhi they were “Harijans”. The confrontations between the two on these issues are lucidly explained in this book. At the same time, it places Ambedkar at a more universalistic position than Gandhi whose approach was totally paternalistic on the ground that the latter considered Harijans an internal part of the Hindu social structure. 
Scholars like Valerian Rodriguez take the poll position when looking at Ambedkar as a ‘Political Philosopher’. A similar, yet unique view to looking at Ambedkar as a political philosopher was done by Aishwary Kumar, who I briefly discussed earlier.  In his book, “Radical Equality: Ambedkar, Gandhi and the Risk of Democracy”, the author argues that Ambedkar was deliberately ignored as a political philosophy. He, till 1970s was considered only a Dalit leader and not as a political scholar who contributed immensely to Indian political thought. In this book the author has presented Ambedkar’s political thought and compared it with that of Gandhi. In this attempt Aishwary Kumar has tried to explore the political relationship as well as the clashes between Ambedkar and Gandhi at different intervals and their interpretations by the European and as anti-colonial expressions. Both these thinkers were educated abroad, and their experience in mass mobilisation portrayed them as mass leaders. Both of them took up the issue of caste, though differently.
The same expression is found in M. S. Gore’s book, “The Social Context of an Ideology-Ambedkar’s Political and Social Thought”, when he talks of the significance of the social background behind the origin of any movement or protest. Through this, the author also investigates the same expression in the background of European and anti-colonial contour. The book argues that both Ambedkar and Gandhi evolved at national front during the colonial period and both were enormously accepted by two distinct and perhaps the rival camps on the basis of actions of the formers. These were the political actions which were taken to fulfill the aims for the same people but in manner opposed to each other. The book has successfully articulated Ambedkar’s and Gandhi’s understanding the colonial period and its related socio-political issues and the ways they both had adopted to provide a solution of a relative degree. The author has tried to examine the conditions under which Ambedkar and Gandhi’s political and philosophical thought has evolved. He further investigates the methods and manners which have shaped the ideas and thought of both the leaders. He attempted to analyse the intrinsic values available in writings of both Ambedkar and Gandhi. In this process, the book creates a platform where Gandhi’s “Hind Swaraj” and Ambedkar’s “Annihilation of Caste” could be analysed in the context of both the author’s ideologies. In the process of writing this work, the author heavily relied on the literature written in English by both the thinkers while ignoring the Marathi and Gujarati writings that they composed. Both Ambedkar and Gandhi addressed the masses, vernacular languages were the only medium for them to communicate with majority of the people.  
Another discontent of this book is the author’s tendency to compare Indian thought and the western philosophies. and to justify his arguments he has taken the back of the foreign philosophers and at times has attached the arguments written by them with Ambedkar and Gandhi and proves them as the writings of both the leaders.  Instead of these lacunas the author has tried to bring both the leaders on common platform and shows that they both had faith in liberal democracy and had encountered with the similar social issue of untouchability and at the same time both tried to determine their interpretations of liberal democracy in its resolution.  
M.S., like Kumar and other discussed Ambedkar’s ideas in the context of political and social thought. His book “The Social Context of an Ideology-Ambedkar’s Political and Social Thought”, however, discusses what no other scholar does – the role of ‘ideology’ in the context of protest. Here, he theorised n ideological framework in which Ambedkar’s attempt to emancipate the Dalits was analysed. 
 The book enunciates how Ambedkar’s understanding of the struggle for emancipation evolved through his theoretical assumptions. Secondly, the book talks about the unique characteristics of movements and how important they are to the study of the nature of a societal system. Each system is distinct from the other and thus the nature of the movement is different too. Thus, this book contextualises Ambedkar’s movement. In the course of ‘contextualisation’, the author explores the nature of Ambedkar’s ideas and how they interreacted with the societal system. The text argues that any event, action, person or idea has a particular background and to understand them, the study of the background becomes essential. Only then can something be concluded. The book is a work of Sociology and study of Social Behaviour. In this framework of social behaviour, the book explores the idea of protests and movements and explains that there is always existed some background for their explosion; the work examines the origin of social movements in a given society. These movements are initiated for bringing changes for betterment of every individual. Ambedkar started movements for the emancipation of the untouchables as protest movements in order to change the social behaviour. The book also presents the ideology of Ambedkar in terms of social movements which is different from the older movements led by social reformers prior to him. This becomes the base of his protests and movements through which he demanded a social space for disadvantaged people with full respect and dignity. 
Christophe Jafferlot, like Sharmila Rege argues how Ambedkar was systematically ignored until the 1970s by scholars and the mainstream political discourse. His book, “Dr. Ambedkar and Untouchability: Analyzing and Fighting Caste”  looks at a Pragmatic and Idealist thinker. He argues that Ambedkar’s birth as a political leader took place during the electoral process, at the formation of his political parties and the writings which Ambedkar contributed immeasurably throughout his academic, social and political life. Quoting Upendra Baxi, who once said that Ambedkar remains a totally forgotten figure, Jaffrelot argues that Ambedkar was ignored by the fraternity of scholars. The author even blames the government also for not devoting the desired attention to Ambedkar till 1970s, the same which was given to Gandhi, Nehru, Patel and Pant. The volumes of collected works of Ambedkar were brought into public domain much later. Jaffrelot explains that this negligence was due to some reasons. First, Ambedkar was considered only as a leader of the Untouchables and not as a leader who participated in the freedom movement Most of the writers that I have discussed in this review agree with this claim. This assumption lacks the fact that Ambedkar’s contribution in the freedom movement was different and unique. The second reason was the position of Ambedkar in Indian society as a leader of voiceless. It is assumed as a fear and as a resentment that Ambedkar still stimulates within Indian polity. The third reason was the exclusion of Ambedkar from the mainstream discourse because of his connection with the British as he at times was also considered as the stooge of the former. 
Unlike the works of most of the scholars, this book is not a biographical account of Ambedkar’s life rather it talks about his contribution to the emancipation of the Untouchables, and also shows how through his interventions, India as a nation state experienced a social and political transformation. The author argues that Ambedkar did not adopt the strategy of romanticism to showcase the glorified past of Dalits in India because the community which he belonged to did not have a golden phase under the hegemonic Hindu social structure. Far from this angle, the author has tried to examine the strategy-oriented approach and the same he experimented in case of Ambedkar. To articulate this the author has tried to understand Ambedkar by situating him in the context of Maharashtra and its social movements. He further analyzed the thought process of Ambedkar, what is caste system and how to annihilate it.  Ambedkar was not considered as a true Social Scientist because his strategies were for the destruction of a social system that oppressed a large number of people. The book also shows how Ambedkar’s approach evolved through the years, from seeking assimilation in the wider Hindu social order to take refuge in politics. Ambedkar tried extensively for the liberation of the untouchables. He collaborated with the British and later with the Congress for the betterment of the untouchables. At later stage he even converted to Buddhism in order to provide the untouchables a life of respect and dignity.     
While it is extremely important to study Ambedkar as an idealogue, it is equally important to understand the ideological context in which Ambedkar functioned. Rajeev Bhargava, thus, argues that when the Constituent Assembly was drafting the Indian Constitution, there evolved a tradition of ‘Indian political philosophy’ which was a product of sincere contribution of the members of the Constituent Assembly who belonged to different and at times rivalry camps of ideological thoughts. The entire process of drafting the constitution was surrounded by a series of debates and discussions in which issues related to society, politics, culture, morality, ethics, minority rights, caste, citizenship, welfare of the disadvantaged received proportional space. “Politics and Ethics of the Indian Constitution” is a collection of essays written by eminent political scientists on the themes that are pertinent to understand this political philosophic tradition that shaped the Indian Constitution. The book further argues that in the history of India the evolvement of its political theory is the result of the political thoughts of the founding fathers who gave a concrete shape to the Indian constitution and was probably the only occasion when the contributors came across through this forum for extensive political deliberation and at the same time arguing over procedural and extensive issues .The author argues that a political theoretical perspective on Indian Constitution is missing and he based this argument on certain assumptions. Firstly, he says that the conceptual structure of the constitution is elaborated insufficiently in the most available existing works. Secondly, he asserts that the same existing works also inadequately grasp the structure of ideals incorporated in the Indian Constitution. The third and last point the author says that in order to comprehend the theoretical perspective and its justification, the Constituent Assembly debates must be referred. This would help to understand the link between the structure of Indian society and the deliberation of the founding fathers behind this. This will also provide the value structure attached to each of the provisions of the Indian Constitution. It is also inevitable to study these value structures, the author argues, as they have a direct impact on the framing of the constitution. These values were used in the form of visions on how the Indian polity will be. Nehru’s vision of social-democracy, Ambedkar’s vison of liberal-democracy, Gandhi’s vision of non-modernist, village centric, egalitarian vision of Prof. K.T. Shah and lastly the vision of Hindutava ideology has dominated the structure of Indian Constitution.  
It is noteworthy that Ambedkar wasn’t just a political activist or a philosopher, he was also a Sociologist. Arun Mukherjee in his “B.R. Ambedkar, John Dewey, and the Meaning of Democracy” writes how Ambedkar’s contribution to sociology has been systematically ignored. In order to understand Caste sociologically and add value to the discourse, I considered Debjani Ganguly’s “Caste, Colonialism and Counter- Modernity: Notes on a Post-Colonial Hermeneutics of Caste. In this book the author articulates the presence of caste system in the countries of South Asia. In her analysis, the examination caste system in South Asia has some major limitations. According to her, the conventional understanding of the Secular, Historic understanding of Caste done by Sociologists is limited. Apart from this, the book argues that caste is produced by certain fundamental forms that remain forever. This further leads to the theoretical and conceptual understanding of the concept of caste in the discourse of social sciences. 
In her book, the author has explored the Mahar community and has tried to understand the same through the literature, both oral and visual, and the spiritual practices it performed. She further argues that in order to deduce the meaning and idea of caste it should be looked not as a substance of backwardness of countries of South Asia but as the organized structure of practices and customs instructed and followed as a flow and the same cannot be articulated in the discourse of nation-building, modernization and development. 
At this moment I will return to Prof. Valerian Rodriguez, this time with his edited work, “Conversations with Ambedkar: 10 Ambedkar Memorial Lectures”, an anthology of 10 lectures on Ambedkar organized by Ambedkar University, Delhi and delivered by eminent scholars on the life and philosophy of Ambedkar. Apart from this, the book covers variety of themes related to Ambedkar’s thoughts, his actions and his influence on the socio-political discourse of Indian society. The book also argues that Ambedkar formulated a fundamental law that created the difference between the freedom of the nation and the freedom of its people. Rodrigues has introduced this book and presented Ambedkar as a highly developed person full of academic strength. He further says that it was because of his instinct towards the educational culture that produced him a scholar and the same scholarly methods he applied for the liberation of his people from the bondages of caste Hindus. He added that there is no match of Ambedkar in terms of his scholarship in the field of politics, philosophy, society etc. While evaluating critically the contributions of various authors in this book, Rodrigues also examines him and his legacy as an entry level of study for anyone to read and understand Ambedkar. The book also exhibits the varying ideological approaches which the contributors have devoted to examine Ambedkar. While examining him the book is confronting with the issues of social justice, discrimination and welfarism, displacement and migration, social control and many more. Some of the authors have directly dealt in the framework of Ambedkar’s ideology being in their own academic proficiency with what Ambedkar was and how he tackled the variety of issues while few authors have not articulated him directly but their connection with the theme can be attached to bring Ambedkar and his ideology in forefront.  Arguing on the same theme, Moggallan Bharti  writes that each lecture delivered during this whole decade talks of Ambedkar in Dalit-Bahujan socio-political domain. One of the contributors of this book, Bhikhu Parekh, argues that to understand Ambedkar’s philosophy in an exact way, it is important to analyze him on the basis of his time period. On the other hand, Upendra Baxi has taken the account of the writings of both Gandhi and Ambedkar and coined a new phrase for their methods as ‘insurgent reason’. He further examines Ambedkar’s opposition to Gandhi on the core issue of caste and calls its impact on untouchable’s life as living death that sounds similar to Gopal Guru’s walking carcass which he used to describe the wrecked condition of untouchables. Romila Thapar’s lecture speaks that while writing the Indian history, the voice of the dissent was missing due to the influence or rather force from the upper caste Hindus. Gopal Guru’s estimation of Ambedkar is the position given to the latter in the field of politics. He rather talks of exemplar in Ambedkar which is very vital for mobilization of Dalits in the protest movements and also for those who neglected him in their scholarly work. All the authors have critically evaluated every word of Ambedkar in order to analyze him deeply and with full dedication as if there is still something left which is not covered and needs to be unveiled so that more can be done for humanity at large.
Anupama Rao’s “The Caste Question: Dalits and the Politics of Modern India” is a work of Sociology and Anthropology. This book is a work of Dalit history of Maharashtra from 1880s to 1990s and examines the role of events, moments and actions of individuals in the formation of history. There is an attempt to interlink the history and anthropology to produce Dalit perspective from modern Indian political discourse. It examines how the mark of disgrace attached to the untouchable community is reviewed as an identity in which the untouchables are looked as a victim community of exploitation and harassment and then with the support of movements and resistance how they became politically powerful. Thus, it becomes imperative to study the history of Indian democratic process with the history of caste and anti-caste movements. The book articulates the linkages of the Dalit community with the concepts like their miserable history, their way of life and their backwardness in absence of education and rational thinking. Moreover, the book tries to fit the Dalits into the framework of modern concepts of nation state like democracy, secularism, citizenship and rights. Doing this the author also brings the question of Dalit into the articulation of global history of political thought. The book contains legal case studies of Dalit and analyses the violence that becomes the base of these studies. It has also tried to transform the Dalit identity from a negative sense to a positive worth. It is further examined how Dalits were mobilized during the colonial rule and how they waged their movements for their realization of individuals of equal dignity and respect. This also includes their demand for rights and other constitutional laws. 
Considering the account of Eleanor Zelliot, Rosalind O’Hanlon and Gail Omvedt, the book also focuses on the writings of Phule and his Satyashodhak Samaj and examines how these writings have shaped the Marathi non-Brahmin and Dalit political thought. Along with this Phule can be observed articulating gender emancipation and the author argues that this mitigation has limited sphere on the ground that the patriarchal setup was imbibed by the caste system so deeply that there is an urgent need to rectify it in form of gender reform.  Rao further claims that the notion of civic rights among Dalits was superseded by the notion of nationalism during the colonial rule and thus helped in the extension of caste system that shadowed and simultaneously illegitimated the voice of Dalits in the form of protests and movements. Analyzing the role of Ambedkar, the book talks about his vital role in transforming the very meaning of Dalit to the conceptualization of political subject and a distinct identity. Rao has called this transformation as vernacularisation of political universals. It is an attempt to focus on collective rights and amelioration rather than individual power and liberation. At the same time, it also examines the challenges faced by women and their efforts to counter them. It also processes the theorization of violence and relates the same with the Dalit identity and their manifestations with social hierarchy.  
Ambedkar’s main argument against caste was that this form of “graded inequality” excluded a large chunk of people from political, social and educational life. In order to understand this aspect comprehensively, I considered the work of Zoya Hasan. She writes in “Politics of Inclusion: Caste, Minorities and Affirmative Action” about the disadvantaged groups and argues that since beginning these marginalized communities have not been included into the mainstream social and political system. A discourse that was accentuated by Ambedkar ever since the 1920, Hasan takes it forward and articulates the claim more comprehensively. She adds that in order to understand the politics of inclusion it is imperative to examine by which level of magnitude the aspirations of the disadvantaged groups are heard by the political elites. She adds that it is inevitable to comprehend the study of diversity among social groups to understand the politics of inclusion. She further examines that the study of marginalized groups is done in isolation from each other and this becomes the major hinderance in the formulation of inclusive research and discourses. She articulates that in the theoretical debates religious minorities have not got any central position due to the politics of communalism. She says that constitutional provisions have also focused on the issues of SCs, STs and OBCs on the ground of their being disadvantaged on the basis of caste. The primary focus of this book is to investigate the politics of inclusion by examining the policies and debate with what the state considers in matters to the position of disadvantaged groups, both caste and religious minorities, and the execution of affirmative action. Further the book also examines what does the term social backwardness mean and on what ground welfare by the state is provided to marginalized groups other than caste.  Hasan further adds that during the drafting of the constitution, preferential treatment was given to the lower castes whereas cultural rights were granted to religious minorities and this became the main hurdle in their development in terms of livelihood and access to resources. To address this issue, she suggests that in place of reservation, affirmative action to be implemented in order to minimize the disparity and to move towards social equality. Adding to this she says that the issue of inclusion can be materialized in more sophisticated manner if the decision-making process will include representatives from the disadvantaged communities.   
Ambedkar’s idea of “minority” could be understood when one reads “States and Minorities”, however, I would shift my attention briefly to the aspect of religious minorities in India. Asghar Ali Engineer in his “Muslims and India” discusses issues related to the role of religious minorities in India’s society and polity. The author argues that the according to Right-wing parties in India, religious minorities like Muslims and Christians are not loyal to India because they are outsiders and are not familiar with Indian culture. This is done to deprive the minorities their political rights. It is further argued that in a democratic set up it becomes difficult to deprive the political rights of minorities, therefore new strategies have been adopted in which removing of minority status is focused. This shows that the hatred is not for religion but of the ethnic stock of Muslims and Christians and at the same time oppose religious pluralism. In contrast to this plurality of religion with the notion of inclusivity is the real essence of democracy and no democracy can exist without it. This book talks about the myths which are propagated by the communal forces about the Indian Muslims and thus it becomes imperative to discuss these myths in order to bring the reality into lime light and present the picture of miseries, the victims of these conflicts do face. The Indian Constitution, in order to provide a more secured and protected status to religious minorities has given Fundamental Rights from article 25-30. But this has no match with what is given to the lower castes by the Constitution as reservation is not granted in educational institutions and in jobs to religious minorities. Even reservation is granted in electoral process to the lower castes and through this their presence can be heard and observed in local bodies, state assemblies and in Parliament.  The argument presented by the author is similar to what Zoya Hasan has talked about in her book Politics of Inclusion: Caste, Minorities and Affirmative Action. In her analysis also she says that religious minorities have not given their due share by the Indian Constitution as they were not considered exploited communities in the past. 
Earlier while discussing Sharmila Rege’s work, I discussed how Ambedkar was inherently a Feminist. Ever since 1916, his writings have some or the other way discussed how in order to legitimise caste within the society, control over women is necessary. To discuss this issue comprehensively, I referred to the arguments put forward by Judith Baxter in her “Positioning Gender in Discourse: A Feminist Methodology”. 
In this book the author has presented a new perspective on the issues of feminist research that talks about post-structuralist discourse analysis. Baxter has called it FPDA (feminist post-structuralist discourse analysis) and explained its connected meanings both in terms of theoretical and empirical values. Through this approach the author has attempted to analyse the discourses those have explained assertively the role of female and how they have bargained their positions, identities and relationships in any given society. In a more comprehensive manner, the book has used FPDA as a tool of methodology. In this book the author has tried to fill the gap which is created by close ties between post-structuralist feminism and social constructionist feminism by associating their link with discourse analysis. For more coherence understanding, the author has taken the help of spoken discourse rather than written. By spoken discourse it means that she has analysed the understanding of positioning the female issue by interaction with the respondents through conversing manner. This, she argues, creates an interactive way in which the speaker feels at ease. In this book the author has articulated FPDA in five interrelated ways. In her first way she explains that there is a contradiction between the female liberation and post-structuralism and due to this inconsistency, a new genre takes birth called the positive contradiction and then it challenges the old customs and paves way for new possibilities of changes. In the second way the author talks about to theorize a unique understanding of FPDA and along with this she also focuses that there is variability to reach to a distinguished approach. In her third way she has presented the interactive approach of spoken discourse. In fourth way the author has attempted to create a relationship between conversation analysis and critical discourse analysis and the same she has used to compare with FPDA. Lastly the author intends to present the case for FPDA in a relatively clear, accessible and user-friendly manner. 
Ranajit Guha writes how the History of India is merely a biography of the Indian elites, which means that the ‘Subaltern perspective is never considered as part of the larger nationalist agenda. Bidyut Chakrabarty in “The Socio-Political Ideas of B R Ambedkar: Liberal Constitutionalism in a Creative Mould” discusses this. In this book the author argues that Ambedkar, during the freedom struggle, touched those issues which were excluded from the mainstream nationalist agenda. These issues were based on the question of marginalization of those communities which part and parcel of the Indian society. In this way his fight for the independence had different warriors which were left ignored and neglected. Moreover, his scheme of independence had no place in the Indian National Congress’s manifesto. On the basis of this argument, he stressed on the principle of individualism where he voiced for untouchable’s position in Indian social structure as a free individual. The author further argues that in raising the question of untouchability as a sin, Gandhi, before Ambedkar, made significant arrangements through its conceptualization of Dalit identity as Harijan identity, on political ground. But for Ambedkar, Gandhi was not comprehensive in his articulation as it was not only political but also social and prior to the former. In this way Ambedkar projected the freedom struggle through a different angle which was more democratic and inclusive and at a same time urged the hardcore nationalists to incorporate the issue of the depressed classes in their core agenda. In addition to this, the author argues that the ideology and concept to take birth, the time frame and the context under which they both are evolving, are very pertinent. Keeping in mind this argument, the author says that two factors have shaped Ambedkar. One was his birth in Mahar jati, a jati of Untouchables that provided him an exclusive identity. With this identity he struggled and then fought tooth and nail. This identity helped him in realization of the atrocities and exploitation and humiliation imposed on the untouchables. The second factor that helped in shaping Ambedkar was the significant role of education. It was the socio-political milieu of the West that moulded his thinking in a progressive manner. The quality of knowledge he gained there helped him in articulation of his methods and strategies in India for the betterment of his community people. The socio-political impetus of Ambedkar was based on his personal experiences which he faced since his childhood. The impact of these experiences was so strong that did not allow Ambedkar to come out of it and forced him to think from this limited perspective. In the true sense of the term this limited perspective was not limited in nature rather in his scheme of limit he put his community which had faced utter wretchedness, servitude, mental and moral degradation. His limited outlook was for the untouchables and for their uplift. It was not that the idea of individual respect was not in Ambedkar’s mind but it became deeper when he entered the Western World where the respect of individual identity was at its peak. For the generalization of this fact, the author stated that Ambedkar was very much influenced by the ideological framework of his mentors in the West, John Dewey and R. A. Seligman, his identical reformer, Booker T. Washington and political philosophers like Thomas Paine and John Locke. Their philosophies made him assertive on the state’s responsibility to provide social justice and at the same time on state’s role as accountable and an answerable entity.      

